The Gateway Experience 


Congratulations!! You are embarking on an exciting and rewarding adventure. You are about to discover your ability to 
perceive, direct, and control your life in ways you never imagined possible. The Hemi-Sync process provides the tools. 
You supply the action. 


Hemi-Sync® is a patented audio technology developed through 40 years of researching the influence of sound on 
human capabilities. Complex blends of Hemi-Sync sound frequencies facilitate different states of consciousness as you 
proceed through the Gateway Experience. There are no subliminal messages. You are in control. 


Cultivate openness - Approach each exercise without expectations. Open yourself to the same childlike sense of 
wonder that characterized your first explorations of the physical world. Many people find it helpful to hold relaxation as 
their only goal, allowing them to notice and value subtle shifts in consciousness. Maintain awareness of your experience 
without judging and remember that you may perceive in different ways. Pay attention to kinesthetic sensations such as 
motion, tingling, or pulsing in your physical body. You may "see" lifelike or symbolic images in your mind's eye. 
Auditory perceptions may manifest as verbal messages, sounds, tones, or even music. Gateway participants often 
report intuitive perceptions of sudden comprehension, a knowing, a gestalt. There is no right or wrong way to 
experience these exercises. Allow yourself to appreciate and value the uniqueness of your own perceptions. 


Recommendations for use - DO NOT LISTEN while driving. Use any standard quality stereo equipment with 
headphones in a distractionfree, darkened room where you can remain undisturbed for about 45 minutes. If exterior 
sounds penetrate, simply let them pass by. Do not use DolbyTm or other noise-reduction systems. 

Wait an hour after eating and use the bathroom before getting comfortable. Avoid alcohol, drugs, or excessive caffeine. 
Loosen tight clothing; remove shoes and glasses or contact lenses. Experiment with lying down or sitting with your head 
supported, to find out which you prefer. Adjust your position as needed: scratch an itch, pull up or remove a blanket 
when metabolic changes produce coolness or warmth. 

Lower the volume so the words are barely within your hearing range. Otherwise the voice after a silent period may 
startle you. You may experience variations in the volume of the Hemi-Sync frequencies. These are intentional; do not 
readjust the volume. 

Many people find that documenting their experiences in a journal is a fascinating method to reinforce learning and 
review progress. Try it. You may find it helpful to review the "frequently asked questions" (see below) from time to time 
as you move along. 

Work with each exercise in sequence after you feel comfortable with the one(s) proceeding. The right pacing is different 
for each of us; there are no rules. You may listen to one exercise daily for a week or a month and then work at a slower 
or faster pace with others. Trust your intuition to know when you are ready to move on. 


DISCOVERY 
Wave 1 


Discovery #1: Orientation 
Energy Conversion Box becomes your mental container to hold concerns, distractions, or interferences for the 
duration of the exercise. See it, feel it, hear it, think it, or simply imagine it. Your container may be simple or ornate, high- 
tech or antique, a wooden chest, a sphere of light, a vacuum cleaner or a nuclear particle collector. 

Imagine concrete symbols to place in the box, such as a wallet for financial worries, a photo or doll representing 
someone who is on your mind. You can place limiting words like "can't," "shouldn't," or "must" in your container; brick 
walls to symbolize your defenses; a desk or computer to symbolize work. Experiment. It's a tool for your use. Allow it to 
change and return to it whenever you wish during an exercise to place inside any new distraction. 


Affirmation focuses your intention and attention. You may use the words as spoken in the exercise, modify them 
to maximize personal relevance and significance, or substitute your own version. Experiment. Make it yours. 


Resonant Tuning accelerates the gathering of your vibrational energy while reducing internal dialogue. It helps 
vitalize and charge your entire system and loosens blockages in natural energy channels. Notice any physical 
manifestations as you vocalize aloud. The sounds on the exercise are only a guide. Set your own rhythm and pace, 
move up and down the scale, experiment with different vowel sounds. 

Breathe only slightly deeper than you normally would and, as you inhale, imagine pulling sparkling, vibrant energy 
into all parts of your body. Allow it to move gently around in your head as you hold your breath. Try releasing tired, stale 
energy though the soles of your feet with each exhalation. 

The opening and closing of your eyes may at first feel awkward, but try doing it anyway. It's valuable for learning that 
you can control autonomic processes and habitual behavior. 

You can return at any time to full waking consciousness by simply breathing normally, opening your eyes, or moving the 
fingers of your right hand. 


Focus 3 is the first signpost along your journey, a Hemi-Sync state where your brain and mind are more coherent, 
synchronized and balanced. 


Return to Full Waking Consciousness (C-1) at the end of this and every exercise is facilitated by a strong audio 
signal. Despite the temptation to take off your headphones early, listen to this signal until it is withdrawn. The more 
completely you come "back" from each exercise, the further you can go into the next. 





Discovery #2: Introduction to Focus 10 


Focus 10 is a level in which your mind remains awake and alert while your body sleeps calmly and comfortably. Follow 
the instructions, focusing upon and then totally releasing each body part. Your body knows how to do this and to "look 
with your closed eyes" as you move towards profound relaxation. 





One of the paradoxes of "mind awake, body asleep" is the possibility of heightened sensitivity: awareness that the 
pores of your skin breathe, hearing the swish of blood flow behind your ears, feeling your heart beat. Spontaneous 
remote sensing is also possible: hearing sounds you would swear you are hearing this time but not the last time, or 
perceiving faraway, delicate odors. Place all expectations in your box, relax, and simply go with whatever you are 
experiencing. 


Health Affirmation at the end of each exercise helps you balance physical and nonphysical energies. Know that it is 
working for you without effort on your part. 


Discovery #3: Advanced Focus 10 


Resonant Energy Balloon (REBAL) is a valuable tool to create a high energy state within and around you. Your 
REBAL acts as a magnet, attracting influences you desire and shielding you from undesired energy. The more you 
build your REBAL, the better you sustain higher energy levels. Your REBAL may spontaneously change form, develop 
a delicate membrane, or become radiant like an intensified aura. Although you may not always perceive your REBAL, 
play with sensing it through feelings, and/or muscle sensations, and/or visually. Build and rebuild it, storing the energy 
as in a charged battery. 

You can turn it on and use it while in C-1 or in any other state much as you would turn on a light. Use one resonant 
energy breath as the switch. Inhale vibrant energy and, as you hold it, think of a bright moving circle with the number 10 
inside it. Let the circle surround you as you exhale. Experiment with "popping" your REBAL while In a group of people 
and see if its resonance attracts people who are in harmony with it. Try extending it around your car to note if you 
negotiate traffic or find parking more easily. 


Discovery #4: Release and Recharge 


Release and Recharge teaches you a method you can use daily, with or without the tape, to release and convert 
self-imposed limits resulting from the encrustation of negative emotions. Learned fear can be a useful warning signal, 
but you no longer need it after you acknowledge the warning. In Focus 10 you can calmly identify and gently release 
fears, blocks, limits - any interferences to your growth - and replace blocked energy with the pure energy that existed 
before the limits were imposed. 

For purposes of this exercise, "fear" denotes the primary emotional charge connected to the self-imposed limit, and 
"emotion" denotes related feelings. Trust that your larger self knows what you are ready to uncover; simply follow the 
instructions and see what comes up for you. If nothing comes, bubble "nothing" away and accept that the process may 
be working on deeper levels of consciousness. 

When you are directed to perceive "the memory, the event," you may connect with a specific occasion or with a 
memory of your prior, unlimited experience. Always pull in clean energy as a final step. 

Here's an example of how energy conversion works: You may perceive a fear of speaking up in groups. Once you have 
bubbled that away, you perceive the emotion of embarrassment associated with that fear. After releasing both, you 
reconnect with the joy and gratification you felt as a small child when sharing your experiences with other people. You 
then reclaim your pleasure in communicating and sharing yourself with others. 

Once you are comfortable with the exercise as described, you can experiment with deliberately depositing and then 
retrieving from your Box a symbol for anything you believe may be interfering with your progress. Follow all the other 
instructions; the only difference is that you predetermine what to work with. For example, if you suspect that 
unconscious fear of separating from the physical body is blocking your progress, place a symbol for this fear (a magic 
carpet anchored to the ground?) into the Box and follow the instructions to release it. 

This exercise is not a quick fix or one-shot panacea. Most selfimposed limits have many layers and will require repeated 
efforts. But if you truly desire to transcend your limitations, it can greatly facilitate your progress. Take heart from the 
many people who report it to be among the most valuable exercises of the entire series and the many who use it daily to 
clear out current frustrations or disappointments before they become encrusted. 


Discovery #5: Exploration, Sleep 


Exploration, Sleep is based on the concept that sleep is a natural Gateway into other states of consciousness. It 
may be that, whether or not we remember, our nonphysical consciousness passes through this Gateway every night. 
The exercise helps you recall this common, natural process in C-1 when you awake. 

It is important not to hold expectations. Let them go. Relax. Approach the exercise with a playful sense of curiosity 
and interest. Just as you opened to the wonders of the physical world when you were very young, be open now in the 
same way to nonphysical experience. You may choose to add to the Affirmation a statement such as, "I am wholly 
without expectations, and open to all experience that awaits me." During the exercise, questions such as, "Am | starting 
to separate?" or "Is this what I'm supposed to be feeling?" interfere with the process. There's plenty of time to assess 
your experiences after the exercise. Simply go with whatever happens and remember that you may perceive in many 
different ways. The Hemi-Sync signals fade at the end of the exercise, leaving you in natural sleep. 


Discovery #6: Free Flow 10 


Free Flow 10 is an opportunity to create your own experience and pursue your own purpose with all the tools 
learned thus far. Seek only what you really want to know, and be responsible for the knowing. Whatever you receive 
becomes a part of you. Your beliefs, energy, and attitude influence the intensity and the extent of your free flow 
exploration. A sense of gratitude enhances communication and union with sources outside your conscious boundaries. 


If you have a particular purpose, write it down beforehand in a succinct, straightforward manner, hold it in mind as you 
begin, but remain open to whatever you experience. Expectations of when and how guidance should come may block 
the very knowledge you seek. You need not know the way to guidance. Choose only to be guided. You may or may not 
"see" or "hear." Tingles or twitches and intuitive cues can be equally enlightening. One Gateway experiencer felt nothing 
but a cramp in the leg. The valuable insight that the object of attention was "cramping her style" came only later. 


Use repetitions of this exercise to "play" with a particular tool: your Affirmation, Box, REBAL, etc. Each time you work 
with the exercise, explore from a fresh perspective. Don't expect your experience to resemble anyone else's. Value your 
uniqueness. It's all right to reexamine a previous experience, but do so with openness rather than trying to recreate an 
identical situation. 

In summary, enter the free flow with awareness, serenity, openness, and enjoy! 


LOOKING AHEAD 


Discovery is only the first step of your on-going adventure with personal growth. Just as each Discovery exercise 
builds upon what you have already learned, the entire Gateway Experience course builds upon itself. As you proceed 
through the rest of the course, feel free to repeat any earlier exercise when you feel moved to do so. The results are 
cumulative. Your continuing explorations can catapult you into higher levels of awareness. 

Wave Il, THRESHOLD, is awaiting you with six sequential exercises, each taking you to new, exciting destinations 
along your journey of selfdevelopment. You'll learn powerful tools for controlling your nonphysical energy, and you'll use 
the high energy state of Focus 12 to make important differences in your life. Contact your local Dealer, or Interstate 
Industries, Inc. at 1-800-541-2488 or P.O. Box 505, Lovingston VA 22949. 


FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS 


1. What should I do if | feel not quite awake and alert after listening to an exercise? There are many effective 
methods for grounding. You can slowly count from 10 to 1; drink cool water; take a cold shower or splash cold 
water on your face, neck and wrists. Weather permitting, walk barefoot outdoors, taking deep breaths and 
releasing excess energy through your feet; place your back against a tree and imagine energy flowing from your 
head to the branches above and from your feet to the tree's roots and down into the very center of the earth's 
core. 


2. Will Hemi-Sync become a crutch? Absolutely not. The HemiSync exercises are like training wheels on a 
bicycle: wonderful for practice, but unnecessary as you learn to ride far and free without support. 


3. How can Hem!-Sync influence me when I'm not listening to an exercise? After you become proficient, 
you simply recall the sensations you experienced during what you consider to be your best, most effective response in 
the desired state. You can trigger the change in consciousness simply by taking a deep breath and remembering those 
sensations. The more you practice, the easier and more effective this becomes. 


4. What if | tend to fall asleep while listening? Your subconscious experiences the exercise even without 
conscious awareness but, of course, you want to know about it. You may choose to listen to an exercise the first time 
while sitting in a straight chair without headphones, so you consciously hear all the instructions. Try putting a symbol for 
sleep in your Box and use pillows to prop yourself in a semi-erect position during the exercise. Continued practice will 
help you maintain the delicate balance between profound relaxation and sleep. 
You may be "clicking out." This is different from sleep and leaves you with the sensation when you return to awareness 
that no time has passed. The memory of your experience will be stored, even though you have no immediate recall. 
Clicking out is a common experience which diminishes as you progress. 

5. What if I'm notable or willing to do Resonant Tuning out loud? It's in your interest to do it anyway. This is an 
important preparation for perceiving nonphysical energy. Your discomfort about vocalizing will eventually wane. 


6. Is it normal to experience buzzing or pressure or an accelerated heartbeat? These phenomena are 
common with shifts in energy levels and, for some people, indicate a response to the Hemi-Sync effect. As you expand 
your consciousness you may become more aware of physical sensations. If you experience discomfort, verify that the 
volume is just barely loud enough for you to understand the words. 


7. What do | do if breathing or heartbeat distracts me from the exercise? Be aware and just let it be. It's a normal 
reaction. Many people find it a comforting link to physical reality that allows them to move more confidently into other 
states of consciousness. If you continue to feel distracted, put the distraction into your Box. Once you realize that this 
awareness is not a problem, it will disappear by itself. 


8. How do I know if I'm in Focus 10 or 12? Everyone perceives the Focus levels in their own, unique way. There's 
no absolute guideline. You may discover that Focus 10 or 12 is associated with sensations of tingling or vibration; 
or a total absence of sensory signals; or particular visual patterns or specific sounds. You may just "know." 
Observe your own perceptions in a relaxed manner, without expectations, without judging. 


9. What should | do if the feeling of heightened energy makes me uncomfortable? Expanding your awareness 
is the goal, because you need to perceive nonphysical energy before you can direct and use it. Try moving the 
energy through your body, speed it up or slow it down. Approaching the experience in an experimental mode will 
ease your discomfort. 


10. What if | can't remain on my back without getting restless? No problem. Prop yourself up with pillows, or sit 
in a comfortable chair, or use ear-buds so you can listen while on your side or stomach. 


11. What if | can't visualize my REBAL? Remember that visualizing is only one way of perceiving. Some people 
"feel" their REBAL by thinking of themselves surrounded by and filled with tingling bursts of energy. Others "hear" the 
energy's crackle or just know intuitively that their REBAL is in place. Frequent practice in "popping" your REBAL 
strengthens it even without your awareness. 


12. How can | tell if I'm getting what I'm supposed to? "Supposed to" simply isn't relevant in these kinds of 
explorations. No two individuals have the same experience. Whether cosmic or apparently meaningless, your 
experiences are valuable. Don't judge. Accept what comes and continue to practice. Thinking about them after the 
exercise - not during - may lead to insight into their significance. You may enjoy the challenge of determining meaning 
for what appear to be small changes in perception, like a detective following clues until the larger picture becomes 
evident. Learn to appreciate the subtleties inherent in consciousness expansion. 


13. Is God appearing when I "see" a flood of light during an exercise? The perception of light suggests that 
your potential for nonphysical awareness is developing, but it is up to you to decide on its meaning. Such light is 
widely reported by explorers of higher consciousness and people who have had near-death experiences, often 
accompanied by euphoria, a feeling of oneness with the universe, a sense of overwhelming love. A Buddhist might 
associate this with Buddha, a Christian with Christ. The Monroe Institute does not endorse any particular 
interpretation and encourages you to find your own. 


14. How many times should | do an exercise before going to the next? This varies from person to person. 
Become familiar and comfortable with the exercise and allow your intuitive wisdom to know when you are ready to 
move on. Complete mastery of a particular technique before progressing is not necessary. Feel free to go back again 
later for further practice. 


15. Can my children listen to the Gateway Experience? Depending on the maturity of the child, use your 
own discretion with children who are 10 or older. We encourage parents to monitor their children's progress and work 
along with them. 


16. Why not combine mind-altering drugs with Hem!-Sync? These exercises train you to take control over 
your states of consciousness. Drugs often interfere with that control. Also, your interpretations and understanding of 
your experiences will likely be more accurate without the unpredictable influences of drugs or other mind-altering 
substances. 


17. How can | convince a sceptic that the Gateway Experience Is worth trying? Without interest and 
desire, the openness that leads to success will be lacking. It will be more convincing to let your own personal growth 
speak for you to someone who is resistant. As you become calmer, more centered, more confident, more creative, 
etc., etc., etc., people close to you will notice and will want to know why. It may be useful to emphasize what you 
have learned, rather than the experiences themselves. When it is appropriate to describe your experiences, try to 
relate them to something the other may be able to identify with. Another approach is introducing the sceptic to a more 
"mainstream" HemiSync tape, such as Catnapper or Concentration. Experiencing and discussing the practical benefits 
of Hemi-Sync in daily life can build a foundation for greater openness. 


18. Are Monroe Institute methods useful for experienced meditators or people who have long practice in 
other disciplines? The many such people who participate say, "Definitely yes!" They appreciate such benefits as the 
speed and ease of attaining the expanded state; the ability to sustain the state; the tools and guidelines for exploration. 
Hemi-Sync seems to meet people wherever they are in their development and assists them in moving forward into even 
deeper levels of self-discovery. 


19. What if | can't get out of my body with Discovery #5? Many of us have hidden fears that hold us back. 
Others try so hard that the intense effort becomes the very block that holds them back. The best way to succeed is to 
relax, let go of expectations, and become nonchalant about it. After all, the classic OBE is just a small part of learning to 
expand consciousness. When you feel thoroughly familiar with Discovery #5, go on to the next and periodically return to 
the earlier exercise. You may find yourself separating from the physical body when you least expect it. 


20. How can I control an OBE? If you set a goal before you begin, you won't need to decide what to do once you 
are out. If an OBE happens spontaneously, remember that thoughts are action. Experiment with thinking of someone 
and contacting his/her energy, rather than arriving at a geographic destination. Any time you wish to return, think of 
rejoining your body and/or move a finger or toe. 


21. When! am out of my body, can I help someone else have an OBE? Participants have reported developing the 
ability to do this. Experiment. You and another person might both try patterning for synchronicity in your OBEs. 


22. What does a nonphysical body look like? People perceive it many different ways ranging from a ball of 
energy, a misty form, or a human shape. It will usually appear as something you are comfortable with. 


TECHNICAL QUESTIONS 


1. What is Hem!-Sync? Hemi-Sync is a patented audio technology developed by The Monroe Institute during more 
than 40 years of researching the influence of sound on human capabilities. Com plex blends of subtle Hemi- 
Sync sound frequencies help focus your attention and stimulate particular states of consciousness. Once 
learned, you can recreate these states from memory. Hemi-Sync is a tool for amplifying your ability to focus 
your mind and direct your thoughts. The specific Hemi-Sync exercises in this series provide a means for laser- 
like focusing of your consciousness. 


2. Does a hissing or swishing sound mean a manufacturing defect? No. This “pink sound” provides a bed for 
the Hemi-Sync signals and helps your mind cooperate with the process. Do not use any noise reduction 
system, as this would interfere with the sophisticated Hemi-Sync mastering. 


3. Is a "clicking" sound normal? No. If you are hearing sounds other than the hissing or swishing referred to 
above, first check to see if the sounds are coming from your equipment or if your equipment needs cleaning. If 
it's clear that the product is defective, return it to us for a replacement at no charge. 


4. Is it Important to have the earphones on the correct ear, as instructed on some of the exercises? No. As 
long as you are using stereo equipment, the intended effect will be achieved. 


5. What's the difference between hypnosis and Hemi-Sync? Hypnosis is commonly described as a process of 
being led into a state of high suggestibility and relinquishing control to the hypnotist. With Hemi-Sync you consciously 
control and direct your wn state of awareness. In this regard, Hemi-Sync has more in common with self-hypnosis, 
although Hemi-Sync helps you achieve the desired state more surely and more quickly. 


6. Do these exercises include subliminal suggestions? No. There are no verbal messages recorded below 
audible levels. The occasional verbal message at very low volume during a "sleep" period is simply a repetition of 
previously heard information. The words are repeated very softly so as not to startle you. 


7. What's the difference between Gateway Experience (GE) and The Monroe Institute's Gateway Voyage 
residential program (GV)? GE is based on GV, and includes some of the same exercises. With GV, you experience 
the different Focus levels of 15 and 21, which are not included in GE. At home, you proceed at your own pace and can 
repeat exercises as often as you wish. Skilled trainers and special facilities support your learning with GV, as well as the 
highly rewarding interactions with other participants who have similar interests. GE is not a prerequisite for GV, although 
many people choose to work at home with GE before coming to GV. GV graduates who have done this report that they 
were able to go "farther" during the residential program because of the strong foundation provided by their prior home 
study. 


8. Can | visit the Institute? While we enjoy meeting our many friends, there would not be a lot for you to see. 
Our administrative building is simply a very busy office. The Residential Training Center, research laboratory, sound 
studio and Conference Center are not open to the public while programs are in progress. The one thing a visitor can 
experience, by appointment only, is a Personal Resource Exploration Program (PREP). This is a private session in the 
laboratory's isolation booth with bio-monitoring equipment and a trained facilitator to guide your personalized exploration 
with Hemi-Sync. PREP is a personal growth experience par excellence. Call the Institute for more information. 


9. Who can | talk with about my Gateway Experiences? To communicate with others who are working with 
these exercises, request a Release Form and/or the names of such people. Also, feel free to communicate with us 
about your progress. 


THRESHOLD 


Wave Il 


Each Wave and each exercise of Gateway Experience builds directly on preceding techniques and information. Use 
of Threshold exercises before having completed Discovery is not recommended. As you work with this Wave, you may find 
it desirable to review the frequently asked questions in the Discovery Manual. 


Focus 12 - Overview - The high energy state and expanded awareness of this Focus level enable you to become 
more conscious of inner resources and guidance. As you continue to use what you learned in Focus 10, you may well find 
entirely new experiences. 

Rarely is nonphysical energy perceived in the same way we perceive in our physical, waking state. Be receptive to subtle 
nuances of kinesthetic, auditory, or visual experiences. You may sense a "knowing," 

a telepathic comprehension that can be later translated into words. With trust, patience, and practice, you will learn to 
perceive more clearly. Sometimes this happens slowly, step by step; sometimes dramatically and suddenly, like water 
breaking through a dam. Let go of preconceived notions about how these exercises "should" unfold for you. Place them in 
your Box at the beginning of an exercise or at any time they intrude. This opens you to a fuller and richer range of 
possibilities in your exploration. 


Threshold #1: Introduction to Focus 12 


Simply relax as you are guided from familiar Focus 10 to Focus 12, and calmly observe any differences. Effort 
and analysis are counterproductive. With repeated experience, the distinctions become more pronounced and you 
come to appreciate Focus 12 as a powerful and empowering state which readily lends itself to a wide diversity of 
purposes. 


Threshold #2: Problem Solvin 


Problem Solving begins your use of Focus 12 energy for its many practical applications. Place your question or 
problem in the center of your consciousness, however you perceive this. Then direct it outwards to your total 
awareness, release it, and wait for the response. 

Answers sometimes come during the exercise, and may come in many forms. Among other possibilities you may 
perceive symbols, abstract images, or colors; "hear" thoughts in your mind; sense subtle changes in energy; experience 
chills, heat, or tingling; notice shifts in your feelings or level of emotional arousal; or suddenly have a clear "knowing." 

If answers do not come as you listen to the exercise, take it as an invitation to heighten your sensitivities as you 
move through your daily activities. Open your perception, for instance, to the conversations of others, passages in 
books,synch ronicities, and the multitude of wondrous ways in which guidance may reveal itself. 

Problem solving in Focus 12 is facilitated by the sincerity of your desire to receive a response, the intensity of your 
emotion, and the clarity of your question. Expressing gratitude as you release your question is also important. This 
acknowledges your trust in the process and amplifies the entire exercise 


Threshold #3: One-Month Patterning 


One-Month Patterning is very powerful for taking charge of your life. Based on the principle that we become 
what we think, the energy of Focus 12 offers this process a speed and intensity in the manifesting of thought 
not generally available in ordinary consciousness. 


Think, feel, or imagine the physical, mental or emotional pattern you desire in your life. Just as you did in the 
previous exercise, place it in the center of your consciousness and then release it. A sense of ease and detachment 
about the pattern lets you know that you have, indeed, released it. 

Be clear about what you want. For example, do you want a new house, or to be happy where you live? To lose 10 
pounds or to feel better about yourself? Pattern only in the present tense, for example, "I am now receiving ..." Use "I" in 
your patterning statement and perceive yourself as an active part of the pattern. Pattern only for yourself. 


Be specific; the more detail in your pattern, the more likely you are to get what you want. Ask only for what you really 
want, because you'll probably get exactly what you ask for. Put emotion and conviction into your practice to vitalize and 
strengthen your intention. Then ask that your pattern work only for the good of your total self and simply let go of 
attachment to the result. 

Although a pattern set in Focus 12 can be changed or cancelled in Focus 12, don't keep checking or changing it 
because of fear or doubt. You wouldn't dig up a seed to see how it's growing, would you? Start with small, reasonable 
patterns. If you pattern the first time for $10 million, part of you may well be sceptical.|f you pattern for $50 and prove to 
yourself it works, later patterns will come more easily. 


Don't specify how your request will be fulfilled. Let your total self decide and direct the method. Though the exercise 
refers to "one-month patterning," you can request that patterns be fulfilled in any time frame: a week, a year, by your 
birthday, etc. Or simply release the pattern to be fulfilled in its own time. 


Threshold #4: Color Breathing 


Color Breathing uses the resonance of colors to develop your ability in directing physical and nonphysical energy. 
Sound, vibration, and other sensations are as valid as visualization for the mental perception of color. One man, blind 
since birth, experienced different colors as having unique textures. 

The exercise guides you through learning to use the following colors: green for reducing excess or harmful emotional 
energy; red for increasing physical strength, speed, and coordination; purple for restoring and normalizing your physical 
condition. 

It's important to end this process each time you practice by perceiving your body as well, whole and perfect. You won't 
want to energize any condition less than the ideal. As you become familiar with this technique, feel free to experiment 
with other colors and to develop other purposes for yourself. 


Threshold #5: Energy Bar Tool (EBT 


Energy Bar Tool is an extremely valuable and highly versatile tool for gathering and directing nonphysical energies. 
History and mythology abound with "power sticks" that link human and spiritual energies, ranging from the staff that 
Moses turned into a serpent to the sceptors that symbolize the power of kings and queens to the sabers of light that link 
the heros of Star Wars to "The Force." While moving through the exercise, focus on finding or creating your own very 
personal EBT, one that shares your energy and holds significance for you. 

However vague your EBT may seem at first, continue practicing and allow it to develop. Your hands may become your 
EBT, rather than something external to you. You may sense the increasingly charged vibration throughout your body, or 
as localized, or as moving and spreading as intensity builds. Your EBT may become a roadway that leads you to further 
explorations. It can be used as a beacon to attract guidance or other intelligence, a vehicle for space travel, or a 
comforting symbol of safety and security. The forms and uses of your EBT are truly limitless. Practice and experiment, 
knowing that its power is reciprocal: as you recharge it, it recharges you. Keep your EBT where it is always available to 
you and creatively use it in your daily life as well as in your Hemi-Sync exercises. As with all the tools you learn in the 
Gateway Experience, it's up to you to take it out of the tool box and use it. 


Threshold #6: Living Body Map (LBM 


Since maps are an objective representation of territory, the underlying concept of the LBM supports the perspective and 
detachment useful in healing. You have doubtless recognized how the progressive nature of Gateway Experience uses 
previous learning as your adventure proceeds. In this exercise for influencing physical body energy, you learn a new tool 
while using your EBT. 

You are first verbally guided to create a white mental outline around your physical body. This "map" represents a 
composite of your entire physical system. Then you change the outline's color to red, representing blood circulation; 
then blue for your nervous system; yellow for the organs of your glandular system; orange for your muscle and bone 
structure. As the exercise proceeds, you learn to use the LBM to identify where healing energy is needed. Then, with 
your EBT, you are guided to direct purple healing energy to those parts of your physical body. 

Remember that visualizing is not necessary for working with energy. To "think" or feel or sense a color or image is to 
create it. As you follow the instructions, consider this as an opportunity to "play" with the shape and form of your EBT. 


The verbal guidance provides a structure, but you need not adhere to it in a rigid fashion. We encourage you to 
experiment and be creative with all the tools, to make them yours, to be open to fresh insight about what works best for 
you. 


FREEDOM - WAVE III is awaiting you as soon as you feel ready to move on. The exercises of Wave Ill give you a 
sense of ease and security as you delve further into nonphysical experience. You are introduced to the Continuum of 
Consciousness and methods for practicing OBEs and remote viewing. Happy adventures! 


FREEDOM 
Wave Ill 


About OBEs- Before beginning these exercises, take a moment to conceptualize your experiences thus far in terms 
of Robert Monroe's Continuum of Consciousness. This continuum can be easily understood by thinking of a radio dial: 
as you turn it, one station phases out and signals from the next begin to emerge out of the static. Let's consider a state 
of alert awareness, with your total consciousness paying attention to the present physical reality, as one "station" on the 
dial. When you find yourself wondering if you turned off the stove before leaving the house, you're momentarily "tuning 
in" another station. Daydreaming is yet another, as is the hypnogogic state on the borderline between wakefulness and 
sleep. C-1, Focus 10 and Focus 12 are arbitrary labels for certain points along the continuum. 

As your daily life proves, you move back and forth along this continuum all the time: you sleep, you wake, you 
daydream, etc. HemiSync helps you shift your attention to a particular "station" or state of consciousness. And even 
when you are picking up a nonphysical consciousness "station," you may retain awareness of your physical body. One 
illustration of this is the classic out-of-body experience in which you "see" your physical body from an outside position. 
You may perceive your nonphysical consciousness as housed in a "physical" body, as a sphere of light, as free-flowing 
energy, or ... There are no rules, no norms, no standards against which you should measure your own experience. As you 
become more and more proficient in experiencing your consciousness as separate from the physical, the method of 
perception becomes quite unimportant and may change from OBE to OBE. What remains important is: Any experience of 
your consciousness separate from the physical body is an OBE, even though you may retain some awareness of your 
body lying in bed, or your breathing, heart beat, etc. 


About Fear- Some people have a strong desire to go out-of-body while at another level they are frightened at the prospect. 
You've learned tools that can help deal with such fears. For example, put them in your Box; add a calming, reassuring 
statement to your Affirmation; know that your REBAL comes with you and keeps you safe and comfortable; let your EBT be 
a two lane highway for carrying you away and returning you surely to your point of departure; repeat Discovery #4; with 
Threshold #2, ask for guidance on how best to ease your fears. 

Above all, let go of any expectation that you will have a particular kind of experience. Trust your greater self to know what is 
right for you and reinforce that trust with a sense of gratitude for whatever experience is awaiting you. Remember that you 
can always return safely to C-1 by simply "thinking" the number "1" and moving your fingers. 


Practice - As you experiment with the different separation techniques on these Wave III exercises, you may discover 
that one works better for you. Or you may find energy building to sudden separation as you are simply relaxing, allowing 
Hemi-Sync to move you along the continuum. Then comes practice, more practice, and still more practice. 


In the beginning stages of developing OBE proficiency, you may find that thought becomes action: a passing thought 
about a person or location may transport your nonphysical consciousness there. With more experience, you will gain 
greater control. At that point, the adventure is totally up to you. You may choose to explore the solar system, map 
the terrains between physical and nonphysical experience, develop friendships with nonphysical entities, or simply 
fly over the nearest treetops. The possibilities are limited only by who you are and how you wish to grow. 


Freedom #1: Liftoff 


Center yourself in the "you" that is your nonphysical energy rather than in your physical body, and practice until you are 
thoroughly familiar with the process, Surprisingly enough, you can help yourself rise by "settling down." Think about how 
it feels to go up in an elevator. Repeated practice gives you assurance that you can return safely and easily and, once 
you know this, it is quite easy to move farther than the exercise provides. Have fun! 


Freedom #2: Remote Viewing 


Remote Viewing guides you through three experiments using your EBT to reach distant people and places with your 
awareness. Listen to the exercise first while sitting up and without headphones to understand the required involvement 
of someone with whom to verify the results. Distance is not a factor; the person can be around the corner or thousands 
of miles away. Select a mutually convenient, specific, hourlong time period so you can make notes before you contact 
the other person. 


For the first experiment, have your associate write 6 numbers on a card, place it inside a white envelope, and lay the 
envelope on a cleared surface that you are familiar with in his/her home. For the second, have the person place a white 
cotton ball in another location you are familiar with. Ensure that the envelope and cotton ball will be standing alone, and 
that you are informed ahead of time where they will be located. In the third experiment you send a message to your 
associate, noting where he/she is and what he/she is doing. 

As you perform the experiments, notice how your perceptions work. Are you more apt to sense shapes, colors, or 
textures? What leads you to describe the things you perceive in the way that you do? What is your emotional 
experience as you are remote viewing? 

Integrate remote viewing into your daily life as you continue to practice these techniques. Allow your total self to "play" 
with and modify them. Over time, your capabilities will develop and strengthen. Remember, there is no failure in 
developing psychic abilities. Learning what does not work is as valuable in moving forward as a successful attempt. 


Freedom #3: Vectors 


Vectors uses your REBAL to give you practice in going and returning with a sense of direction. While perception 
involving nonphysical energy is not limited to ordinary notions about space, using your physical body as a reference 
point is a good way to learn to establish control over your movement. 

You are asked to imagine a clock face, with 12 always just above the top of your head. You first learn to extend your 
perception around the face of the clock in a two-dimensional, vertical plane, with 3 being outside your left hip, 9 outside 
the right, and 6 just below your feet. In the next part of the exercise, you rotate the clock face so that 3 is in front of your 
hips and 9 is behind. The instructions lead you in exploring threedimensional space. 

Notice the feelings associated with perceiving beyond your physical body. Detect any interesting or unusual features of 
a particular vector, or changes in awareness associated with changes of position on the clock. You may find one vector 
especially stimulating, even a source of information. As always, make these techniques your own; experiment with them; 
establish and practice with additional reference points. 

The more you repeat this exercise, the more proficient you become in controlling movement. Eventually, you will be able 
to use this learning in all your explorations. 


Freedom #4: Five Questions 


Five Questions leads you in asking: Who am |? Where and who was | before | entered this physical existence? 
What is my purpose for this existence in physical matter reality? What action can | now take to serve this purpose best? 
What is the most important message | can receive and understand at this point in my existence? 

Don't anticipate verbal answers. Keep in mind the various perceptual methods you have been experiencing 
and open your awareness to kinesthetic sensations, emotions, a sense of "knowing," or images. Whether the responses 
come from your total self or from an external source, it's up to you to translate this nonverbal communication into words 
or visual representations that hold meaning for you. 

These questions are only a beginning. As you continue to practice this exercise you can substitute your own 

and repeat any question for clarification or fuller understanding. Ask what you really want to know, infuse your 

questions with this desire, and express gratitude for the guidance you will receive. 


Freedom #5: Energy Food 


Energy Food teaches you a method for restoring depleted energy in C-1; it is an encoding of the process rather 
than actual application. To know whether the encoding is accomplished or whether to repeat the exercise, use the 
method shortly after each time you listen to the exercise. If you feel more energized, you have achieved proficiency with 
another valuable tool for use in your daily life. Then move on to the next exercise. 


Freedom #6: First Stage Separation 


First Stage Separation builds on previous exercises to take you farther in consciously controlling your nonphysical 
energy. Practicing five different methods of dissociation from your physical body provides the opportunity to discover 
that one is more comfortable for you, or to experiment with combining two or more of these methods. With each one, 
you can return to the physical body by using the "Return to C-1" encoding. 

Log-rolling- Focus on rotating and rolling the nonphysical energy within your physical body as if an axis runs through 
your body from your head to your feet. When you sense a release of "surface tension" between your physical and 
nonphysical energies and you are rotating freely, stop the focus on rolling and allow it to continue. Once the "out of 
phase" condition is comfortably established, you simply turn over and move outward. Reorientation can be easily 
accomplished by rotating until your nonphysical energy is in alignment with the physical. You may perceive something 
akin to a little "click," and you are reintegrated. 

Pole- Using your feet as a pivotal point, you are directed to move your nonphysical energy slowly up and out, head first, 
until you are in an upright position. When your energy feet are the only point of contact, intent is sufficient to accomplish 
complete separation. 

Backing away - is simply that; you slowly back out and away from your physical body. Once this is achieved, you can 
turn away and practice directing your movement with the techniques from the Vectors exercise. 

Flowing-- involves sending out your nonphysical energies through the top of your head in the form of a cloud or fog or 
thin spray of gas. Once separated, this often reforms quite naturally into a replica of your physical body. You can then 
"jet" away on your EBT, float off inside your REBAL, practice with your vectors, or use any of the other tools you have 
learned. 

Floating - involves an emotional association with the concept of floating or soaring. As you contemplate how pleasant it 
would be to float upward, like a cloud or a kite, your nonphysical energy responds to this emotional wish. Once separation 
is achieved, you can gradually diminish the emotion so other parts of your total self can direct your experience. 

Repeated practice in a relaxed state, without expectations, is the best way to achieve comfort and confidence in your ability 
to separate and return easily and surely. Think. of learning to walk. When your first attempt to stand erect as a 
child ended with a plop to the floor, did you give up and decide to spend the rest of your life crawling? Of course not! 


ADVENTURE 
Wave IV 


Use of these exercises before completing all previous Waves of Gateway Experience is not recommended. 
Discovery helped you build a strong, comfortable foundation for nonphysical exploration in Focus 10. Threshold taught 
you more tools for directing and controlling nonphysical energy in the energy state of Focus 12. Freedom provided you 
with practice in separating your nonphysical from your physical body. Adventure offers you personal direction and 
control of new experiences, new ideas, new capabilities, and new exciting explorations. 


Adventure #1: One-Year Patterning 
One-Year Patterning requires your thoughtful prior consideration about exactly how and what you desire to be in one 
year's time. Use the same guidelines given for Threshold #3 as you follow the same process. The differences are the 
longer time frame and, more importantly, your increased knowledge of your ability to use the power of expanded 
consciousness. Be sure you really want what you pattern for, pattern strongly, and let it go with trust and confidence and 
gratitude. 


Adventure #2: Five Messages 


Five Messages requires no prior action except, as usual, to approach the exercise with openness, gratitude, and a 
sensitivity to your perceptions of any nature. Wait until after to analyze and interpret your messages. Such "left brain" 
functions interfere with your synchronized Focus 12 state. Review the guidelines for Threshold #2 and Freedom #4 for 
additional suggestions. 


Adventure #3: Free Flow 12 


Free Flow 12 - After introducing you to a "beacon guidepost" as your personal reference point, this exercise 
supports planned, systematic explorations wherever you desire. Deciding on a purpose (or destination) before you begin 
helps you avoid drifting into a sleep or dream state. Seek information or guidance you desire, and express gratitude for 
what you receive. As you repeat the exercise again and again, extend the scope of your journeys. 

During these self-directed adventures, experiment creatively with any and all of the methods you have learned. 
Remember: these valuable tools cannot serve you unless you take them out of your mental tool box and use them. 
Roam far and free in perfect comfort, knowing that you will safely and surely return to C-1. 


Adventure #4: NVC | 


Nonverbal Communication (NVC) is not what we commonly understand as body language, but rather a primary 
method of interaction in and among different realities and energy systems. It is total expression, occuring within the mind 
and in mind-to-mind exchanges. You have encountered NVC in previous Gateway Experience exercises and in the 
dream state: vibrations, light, action, emotion are a few examples. Begin to build your NVC "vocabulary" with these and 
other nonphysical perceptions, together with new meanings for familiar perceptions. Experiment with all your Gateway 
Experience tools and methods of perception and practice repeatedly to develop confidence in your NVC ability. 


Adventure #5: NVC II 


Further practice to develop your NVC vocabulary leads to communicating your Affirmation nonverbally. Then you 
use your expanded awareness to receive NVC from others. The more you strengthen your NVC ability, the better you 
will learn from your Gateway experiences. Practice counts. 


Adventure #6: Compoint 


Compoint, an abbreviation for communications point, is a location you establish along the continuum of 

consciousness. Actively engage in creating an environment that invites communication. Some examples could be a high 
tech computer station to receive input from the mainframe, a lush garden with comfortable benches overlooking a 
tranquil pond, or a cozy log cabin with overstuffed chairs for cherished conversation with dear friends. Let it be 
appropriate for you. 
Your growing NVC skills enable you to use the compoint to gather information, encounter other energy systems, or 
simply observe. You develop more NVC vocabulary for reaching out, greeting, saying goodbye and expressing 
gratitude. Because you can go to your compoint easily and surely whenever you wish, it can serve as a convenient 
rendezvous with your nonphysical friends. 


EXPLORING 
Wave V 


Listening to these exercises before having completed all the previous Waves is not recommended. You will want all your 
tools and all your NVC capability for this unlimited Exploring without verbal guidance. Your experiences are facilitated by 
Hemi-Sync signals that guide access to different points along the continuum of consciousness and by MetaMusic 
composed specifically to support your further learning. Simply relax and sense your progression through the now-familiar 
preparatory process; use the methods you know to achieve Focus 10 or 12; and know that you are now able to control the 
process by your own mental direction. Remain sensitive to NVC and new methods of perception. Here are a few 
suggestions to stimulate thinking about the exploring you may wish to undertake. 


Travel through time with questions such as, "Who or what was | before this life?" or "Who or what will | be during 
my next human experience?" Explore connections between past, present and future with "Does the future influence the 
past?" and the reverse. Perceive yourself evolving in the direction you desire and notice if this affects who you are in the 
present. 


Communicate with other life forms by interacting with the energy of a cloud, with a flower, a rock, a mountain, a 
forest, or a beloved pet. 


Experience nature's energy by allowing the vital forces of ocean surf to swirl around you and flow deeply within 
you. Imagine yourself embracing a tree, strongly rooted in the earth and extending to the sky and feel the flow of 
energies from below and above gathering within you. Perceive a gentle movement of air around you and sense the 
weightless energy that is free to float, to fly, to soar. 


Build your NVC by traveling to nonphysical energy systems. What is the landscape? Are there inhabitants? What 
information can you glean? 


Go deeper within the earth by imagining yourself travelling to its very core. Or go deep within yourself. What do 
you experience? 


Exploring #1: Mission 10 


Mission 10 is a totally self-directed free flow exercise in Focus 10. Decide on a purpose and then, with no verbal 
reminders of C-1, enjoy a more powerful and effective Focus 10 exploration. Remember the contents of your tool box. 
When you sense a change in the sound patterns, return to C-1 by whatever method(s) have proven most comfortable 
for you. 


Exploring #2: Mission 12 


Once again, predetermine your purpose. This can be patterning, problem solving, asking questions, or exploring a new 
concept or locale, to suggest just a few. Then simply relax, allowing the Hemi-Sync signals to carry you first to Focus 10, 
then on to Focus 12, and return to C-1 when it's time. 


Exploring #3: Mission Day 


Mission Day provides support for a powerful 15-minute patterning process. Use it in the morning to set the tone for a 
day of calm centeredness, success and accomplishment. After the preparatory process, go to Focus 10 or 12 
(experiment with both) and express your desires for the day in thought, imagination, emotion, or active mental pictures. 
Refer to Threshold #3 to review suggestions for effective patterning. 


Exploring #4 Mission Night 


Mission Night is for use when you are comfortably ready to drift into sleep, and will not awaken you at the conclusion of 
the exercise. Go to your choice of Focus 10 or 12 and pattern to direct your sleep experience. You may choose to solve 
a problem, receive a message, remember your dreams, have an OBE, remote view, or enjoy any other experience you 
desire. Let your creativity be your guide for each night's mission. 


Exploring #5: Horizons 


Horizons provides Hemi-Sync signals that evoke memories, feelings and events. There is no need for a purpose. As 
usual, perform your preparatory process, choose the desired Focus level, and simply relax and let it happen. You 
may find that repeated experiences with this exercise stand alone, or that threads of continuity connect one with 
another. Many people like to record their experiences for later examination and reflection. 


Exploring#6: Pathways 


Pathways leads you along forgotten paths or opens new paths for exploration. "Play" with moving between Focus 
levels and note any shifts in awareness. The Hemi-Sync signals will let you know when to come back to C-1 by your 
chosen method. 


PROSPECTING 
Wave VI 


It is important to have completed all previous Gateway Experience exercises before listening to these. As in Wave 
V, there are no verbal instructions. MetaMusic and Hemi-Sync signals support your adventures as you dig for that 
diamond of thought, that golden insight, or artifact of knowledge that will propel your personal growth. 
While goals or purposes are suggested for some of these exercises, accept that your greater self may choose 
another experience for you. Remain open and accepting, don't judge, relax, and trust that what is supposed to happen is 
unfolding for you. 


Prospecting #1: Metamorphosite 


Set a mental goal before seeking the gems of metamorphosis, or change. After completing the preparatory process and 
going to Focus 10 or 12, use patterning to manifest the changes you desire in your life. It might be useful to review 
previous suggestions about effective patterning in Threshold #2. Hemi-Sync signals assist your return to C-1. 


Prospecting #2: Bio-Body 


Bio-Body is for exploring the richness of your physical body. After the preparatory process, go to the desired Focus 
level and use the appropriate tools to tune in to your body's rhythms and functions. Reviewing the exercises that taught 
you to create your LBM and EBT (Threshold #5 and #6) might be useful in helping you extract maximum value from Bio- 
Body. The more you practice this exercise, the better you will be able to maintain or restore optimum physical balance 
and wellbeing. 


Prospecting #3: Null Point 


Null Point was unearthed as a result of our laboratory research. Physiological measurements of research subjects 
indicated that the body's electrical polarity shifts into a neutral phase, which we named the "null point." Subjects 
consistently reported this to be a productive "window" for taking off in any desired mental direction. At the null point you 
may purposefully and consciously decide exactly what you choose to explore. To reach the null point, complete the 
preparatory process, go to Focus 10, then to 12, and simply allow the Hemi-Sync signals to guide you to the null point. 


Prospecting #4: Plus Polarity 


Plus Polarity leads you through the null point to the opposite polarity from your starting place. Scientific studies 
suggest that the body's polarity routinely cycles between positive and negative. In our laboratory we repeatedly observe 
that objectively measured polarity shifts are correlated with subjectively reported changes in consciousness. After the 
preparatory process and achieving your desired Focus level, simply relax and allow the Hemi-Sync frequencies to 
support a polarity shift. Be aware of subtle changes in awareness such as a greater capability to recognize more 
aspects of nonphysical energy. The signals will bring you back to C-1. 


Prospecting #5: Near Reaches 


Near Reaches allows you to pass through the null point to discover the precious treasures available to you in 
time/space reality. 


Prospecting #6: Far Reaches 


Far Reaches supports your search beyond the vast expanses of the physical universe and into the infinite nonphysical 
energy systems that extend beyond time and space. All that you have learned in Gateway Experience has prepared you 
for such journeys. Dig deep. Soar high. You can now transcend all limitations and bring untold riches back to your 
waking, physical consciousness. 


The Gateway Experience Wave VII — Odyssey A Journey to Focus 21 


Voiced by Laurie Monroe 


Forward to Wave VII — Odyssey 


The Gateway Experience In-Home Training Series evolved directly from the Monroe Institute’s world- 
renowned Gateway Voyage. Thousands of people have journeyed from around the world to attend the 
highly acclaimed Voyage or another of the Institute’s six-day residential programs. Given the popularity of 
these life-enhancing programs, it is easy to understand why the Gateway Experience is widely considered 
the preeminent in-home course for developing, exploring, and applying expanded states of awareness. 
Indeed, like the Voyage, the Gateway Experience has attracted loyal participants from all walks of like 
from every corner of the globe. 


Wave VII is an odyssey of self-discovery and, as such, is aptly titled “Odyssey.” The name implies an 
extended adventurous voyage, an intellectual or spiritual quest. Certainly, by this definition, the entire GE 
program may be considered an odyssey. Wave VII is also a milestone in this regard, as prior to its 
release GE enthusiasts were not permitted an opportunity to work with Focus 21 (the bridge to other 
energy systems). The extraordinary states of awareness made possible in Focus 21 exercises had 
previously been reserved for the Institute’s residential programs. 


While actual experiences vary from person to person, most program participants have considered their 
Focus 21 exercises to be profoundly meaningful, if not life changing. Not surprisingly, requests for Focus 
21 to be included in a continuation of the GE in-home program have outnumbered all other requests we 
have received, without exception. 


So why, after decades of receiving such requests, was a decision finally made to release Focus 21 
exercises for use outside the Institute’s residential programs? In a word, timing. Much has changed in 
the evolution of human consciousness since the Institute’s program beginnings. 


On an individual level, it may be observed that the universe works with impeccable timing in matters 
related to personal growth and spiritual development. Untold numbers of individuals, for example, have 
been guided to attend Institute programs at what may be considered the most appropriate time. Similarly, 
we were guided to release Focus 21 exercises with Wave VII to be used for the first time outside the 
Institute programs. 


Robert Monroe endeavored to offer “something of value” to our contemporary culture so as to 
constructively change man’s direction and destiny. Wave VII of the Gateway Experience is offered in the 
spirit of this vision. Odyssey is dedicated to Robert A. Monroe, to all who are committed to personal 
growth, and to the evolution of humanity seven generations from you. 


We welcome your participation. 


Odyssey 


Wave VII — Odyssey 


In 1957 Robert Monroe began having out-of-body experiences that altered his life forever. The first of his 
OBEs initiated a long series of explorations into the limitlessness of human consciousness. The 
documentation of these first experiences became what is now known as the “classic OBE,” in which a 
person actually sees her/her body and perceives his/her consciousness as clearly separate from the 
physical body. 


Although Bob’s experiences were both dramatic and life changing, it soon became apparent that the OBE 
phenomenon was just the tip of the iceberg. As he grew more comfortable in exploring altered states of 
consciousness, Bob realized that his experiences in what he referred to as Locale 1 (the physical world 
around us) had served to trigger his innate curiosity. His keen sense of the rational and his curious 
nature would subsequently give birth to a more complete understanding of his OBE adventures. 


In time, Bob’s explorations developed a level of maturity that required the coining of a new term to more 
accurately describe his experiences. He had come to understand that “outer space” and “inner space” 
are one; therefore, the concept of going “out of body” no longer applied. In practice, Bob had learned that 
he could project a portion of his consciousness “there” while retaining a portion of consciousness within 
the physical body. His discovery meant that consciousness transcended the physical boundaries of time 
and space. Thus, the term “out of body” was simply too limiting. “Phasing” is the term he introduced to 
encompass these new realizations. 


All of us know the meaning of phasing through personal experience. We merely take the phenomenon for 
granted. For example, as you continue to read you might become aware of the position of your physical 
body. You may simultaneously be aware of your surroundings, including such variables as room 
temperature sounds and smells, even the intensity of available light. Perhaps you are even thinking 
about what you will experience as you listen to Wave VII exercises — all while you are reading and 
integrating the words on this page. Your ability to do so is simply your consciousness phasing in and out 
of multiple levels of awareness. 


Your consciousness can and does operate simultaneously in multiple levels of awareness. It may be 
directed toward the past, the present, or the future. It may be focused in this reality or others. You alone 
are responsible for how you choose to focus your conscious awareness. The concept of phasing one’s 
consciousness can explain all paranormal or psychic phenomena from Lucid Dreaming or Remote 
Viewing to Near Death Experiences. Your ability to phase is so inherent that it may have escaped your 
notice, yet the potential applications for this remarkable ability are far-reaching. 


The purpose of Wave VII is to assist you in applying this natural ability. The beginning exercises take 
place in Focus 12, a state of expanded awareness in Locale 1. These exercises are designed and 
scripted directly from Bob’s original explorations in what he then called the out-of-body state. In the 
process of working with these exercises, you will become familiar with the “second body.” The second 
body (also referred to as the energy body) is actually the field of energy that surrounds the physical body. 


With practice, you will learn how to expand your energy body, moving it progressively away from the 
location of your physical body. You will remember how to manipulate and control your energy body 
through the projection (or phasing) of your consciousness. After you become familiar with the vibrations 
of your second body, you will have the opportunity to explore the far reaches of physical reality in Locale 
1. 


The Gateway Affirmation has long been an integral component of the Monroe Institute’s residential 
programs. In Wave VII, you will learn to ask for help and assistance from those whose wisdom and 
experience is equal to or greater than your own. 


Trust that your experiences are exactly as they should be for you at the time. Your heart-felt appreciation is an 
appropriate means to acknowledge any assistance given you. It is, therefore, recommended that you take time to 
express your gratitude following each exercise. 


The final exercises of Wave VII are designed to guide you beyond the boundaries of physical reality. You 
will journey to Locale 2, which awaits beyond the bridge that connects physical time-space reality with 
other dimensions and other levels of awareness. Focus 21 is the bridge to other states of expanded 
awareness. At this point, you will be a true explorer, moving into realms of awareness we will not attempt 
to specify here. Indeed, such realms are often indescribable. Those who have traveled this path 
frequently return to physical reality with few, if any, words to recount their experiences. As Bob would 
say, “Now that you have the tools, find out for yourself.” 


Bob was also fond of saying “Only you can change you.” It is the significance and meaning that you give 
to your experiences that will help you achieve personal growth. Trust yourself throughout these exercises 
and know that a greater part of you is always there to help and assist you. 


It is important that you experience each exercise in succession, building directly on the tools and 
techniques learned in the previous exercise. The goal is to practice what you learn so you can repeat the 
experience effectively without listening to the exercise. The more you do this, the easier it will become. 


Use your intentions and willingness to explore to assist you in transcending limiting beliefs. It is our hope 
that you might come to know you are more than your physical body. 


We appreciate your dedication to personal growth and thank you for your continued support of the 
Gateway Experience. As always, we urge you to keep a journal of your explorations. We invite you to 
share your Wave VII experiences and would be delighted to hear from you. 


Contact Information: 

The Gateway Experience Coordinator 
c/o Monroe Products 

P.O. Box 505 

Lovingston, VA 22949 

Phone (804) 263-8692 


E-Mail: Interstate@Hemi-Sync.com 


Wave VII Exercises 


Odyssey 1 — Sensing Locale 1 

Exercise 1 will reacquaint you with Focus 12. While in Focus 12, you will be introduced to your energy 
body (second body) as a field of energy surrounding your physical body. You may equate this second 
body to the life force that animates the physical body or you may choose to refer to it as your etheric 
body, subtle body, or light body. Call it what you will, this energy field is the same, vibrating and alive — 
an extension of your physical body. Exercise 1 will assist you in learning to control your energy body. 


Odyssey 2 — Expansion in Locale 1 

Exercise 2 will enable you to begin a greater exploration of Locale 1 through the expansion of your 
energy body in Focus 12. This is accomplished by speeding up the vibrations in your energy body and 
expanding it outward, like a large bubble surrounding your physical body. Once fully expanded, you will 
move your awareness toward the far reaches of your energy body; becoming lighter as you move farther 
from the confines of your physical body. 


Odyssey 3 — Point of Departure 

With practice, you will have become comfortable and proficient in moving your consciousness within an 
expanded energy body. Now you are ready for take-off. Once again you will be led to Focus 12, where 
you will move your consciousness into your energy body and rotate it 180 degrees. This technique may 
seem familiar from earlier exercises in the Gateway Experience. This exercise, however, has a very 
different starting point — your energy body — which is vibrating at a very high speed. The rotation may 
also seem different. For some, the experience may appear to be like a very slow movement in time and 
space; for others, a shift in awareness, like having eyes in the back of your head. You may actually see 
your own body. It is best to suspend expectations. Whatever your experience, your goal during Exercise 
3 is to project your consciousness out of phase with your physical body. 


If you have difficulty with this exercise, don’t despair. Please know that not everyone will have a conscious out-of- 
body experience. It takes a lot of practice for most, and many of us have hidden fears that hold us back. Also, if you 
try too hard for an OBE, the intense effort can become the very distraction that holds you back. Try to be nonchalant 
about OBEs. They are just a small part of the process of self-exploration and personal growth. 


Odyssey 4 — Nonphysical Friends 

We encourage all who participate in our residential and in-home programs to be open to the idea of 
asking for and receiving assistance. Our enthusiasm for doing so originates from our early experiences 
with the Explorer sessions conducted at The Monroe Institute’s laboratory facilities. During these 
sessions, it became apparent that our Explorers were not alone; rather, they had an abundance of help. 
“Helpers in energetic form” would typically position themselves two on each side of the Explorer. These 
helpers might assist the Explorer in leaving his/her physical body or contribute to otherwise with purpose 
of asession. The particulars of how these nonphysical friends were helping were not always obvious, but 
their benevolent intentions were remarkably clear. This much-appreciated cooperation gave rise to the 
latter half of the Gateway Affirmation, which became an essential component of our programs for 
exploring states of consciousness. Who are these non-physical friends? We prefer that you decide for 
yourself. Exercise 4 is designed so you might establish trust through direct personal contact. 


Odyssey 5 — Movement to Locale 2/Intro Focus 21 

Exercise 5 (Movement to Locale 2) may be your first conscious experience in Focus 21 (the bridge to 
other energy systems). As previously mentioned, Focus 21 is an extraordinary state of awareness that 
was previously reserved for the Institute’s residential programs. As you relax into this exercise, 
specialized Hemi-Sync signals and verbal guidance will lead you to Focus 21. Carefully observe the 
subtle changes in vibrations or feelings of movement within your body as you are verbally guided from 
Focus 12 to Focus 21, transitioning through the various states of consciousness as you choose. 


Odyssey 6 — Free Flow Journey in Focus 21 

This exercise is the culmination of all your previous work and is brand-new territory for your exploration. 
Again, staying focused and aware is important. You will move to Focus 21 directly from 12 by simply 
projecting your consciousness and guidance to the light of Focus 21. There, you will once again be 
encouraged to ask for assistance and guidance from those whose wisdom, development, and experience 
are equal or greater to than your own. No matter how many times you participate in this exercise, you will 
never exhaust its limitless possibilities for rich and abundantly rewarding far journeys. 